# 2022 WINTER 1DM3: Assignment 8
## This assignment cover sections 6.4, 7.1-7.3. 

* Instructor: Bin Guo
* Marking: Adam Mak, Hamrish Saravanakumar, Simone Ocvirk (maka9, saravah, ocvirks)

* You will be working on this assignment within your assigned group. Ensure that all students work on the assignment questions together. __ONLY ONE STUDENT WILL BE SUBMITTING YOUR ASSIGNMENT ON BEHALF OF THE GROUP__. All students will recieve the same mark on the group, unless you feel as though a student/students have not contributed to the assignment. If this is the case please reach out to one of the marking TAs so we can work out a solution. __You must write the names of which students contributed to each question at the top of each answer cell__.

* The assignment is __due on Sunday March 20th at 11:59pm__. 

* __Your answer should give full detailed explainations__.

* The practice questions are explained in tutorials and not counted as marks. The full marks is __100__ (there is no bonus).

* The total marks up to the maximum 100 marks.

* NOTE: Many of these questions deal with proofs. You will __NOT__ achieve full marks on a question if you simply provide an example when a complete proof is needed.

## IMPORTANT REMINDERS!


- __ONLY THE GROUP LEADER WILL BE SUBMIT ON BEHALF OF THE GROUP__


- __YOU MUST WRITE THE NAMES OF WHICH STUDENTS CONTRIBUTED TO EACH QUESTION, THIS IS NOT OPTIONAL__


- __ALL ANSWERS MUST GIVE DETAILED EXPLANATIONS OR STEPS, IN THIS ASSIGNMENT MORE THAN 50% OF EACH QUESTION'S MARKS ARE ALLOCATED TO THE EXPLANATIONS/STEPS, SO JUST GIVING THE ANSWERS WILL NOT LET YOU ACHIEVE 50%__

## Practice Question 1 (Section 6.4, Exercise 1), Not marked

Find the expansion of $(x + y)^4$

1. using combinatorial reasoning, as in Example 1.


2. using the binomial theorem.


YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 2 (Section 6.4, Exercise 13), Not marked

Use the binomial theorem to find the coefficient of $x^ay^b$ in the expansion of $(2x^3-4y^2)^{7}$,where


1. a = 9, b = 8.
2. a = 8, b = 9.  
3. a = 9, b = 2.



YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 3 (Section 7.1, Exercise 3), Not Marked

What is the probability that a randomly selected integer chosen from the first 100 positive integers is odd?


YOUR ANSWER HERE


## Practice Question 4 (Section 7.1, Exercise 5), Not Marked
What is the probability that the sum of the numbers on two dice is even when they are rolled?\\



YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 5 (Section 7.1, Exercise 23), Not Marked

What is the probability that a positive integer not exceeding 100 selected at random is divisible by 5 or 7?


YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 6 (Section 7.1, Exercise 33), Not Marked

What is the probability that Abby, Barry, and Sylvia win the first, second, and third prizes, respectively, in a drawing if 200 people enter a contest and


1. no one can win more than one prize.

2. winning more than one prize is allowed.

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 7 (Section 7.2, Exercise 9), Not Marked

What is the probability of these events when we randomly select a permutation of the 26 lowercase letters of the English alphabet?

$P(26,26)= 26!$

$|S|=26!$


1. The permutation consists of the letters in reverse alphabetic order.


2. z is the first letter of the permutation.


3. z precedes a in the permutation.


4. a immediately precedes z in the permutation.


5. a immediately precedes m, which immediately precedes z in the permutation.


6. m, n, and o are in their original places in the permutation.



YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 8 (Section 7.2, Exercise 19), Not Marked
Assume that the year has 366 days and all birthdays are equally likely. In Exercise 19 assume it is equally likely that a person is born in any given month of the year.

1. What is the probability that two people chosen at random were born during the same month of the year?


2. What is the probability that in a group of n people chosen at random, there are at least two born in the same month of the year?\\

3. How many people chosen at random are needed to make the probability greater than 1/2 that there are at least two people born in the same month of the year?



YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 9 (Section 7.3, Exercise 3), Not Marked

Suppose that Frida selects a ball by first picking one of two boxes at random and then selecting a ball from this box at random. The first box contains two white balls and three blue balls, and the second box contains four white balls and one blue ball. What is the probability that Frida picked a ball from the first box if she has selected a blue ball?\\



YOUR ANSWER HERE

-----------------------------------------------

## Question 1 [12 marks]

Find the expansion of $(x+y)^6$ and $(3x+y^2)^4$ using binomial theorem.  

The binomial theorem is as shown: $(a+b)^n = \sum_{k=0}^{n} \binom{n}{k}a^{n-k}b^k$

Make sure to show all steps, including stating what $a, b, n$ is equivalent to in each expression.   
Each expression is worth **[6 marks]**.  

**Felix Fong**

### Expansion of $(x+y)^6$
- $a$ is equivalent to $x$
- $b$ is equivalent to $y$
- $n$ is equivlanet to $6$
Thus,

$$\begin{align*}
	(x+y)^6
	&=
		\sum_{k=0}^6 \binom{6}{k} x^{6-k}y^k \\
	&=
		\frac{6!}{6!0!} x^6 y^0
		+
		\frac{6!}{5!1!} x^5 y^1
		+
		\frac{6!}{4!2!} x^4 y^2
		+
		\frac{6!}{3!3!} x^3 y^3
		\\&+
		\frac{6!}{2!4!} x^2 y^4
		+
		\frac{6!}{1!5!} x^1 y^5
		+
		\frac{6!}{0!6!} x^0 y^6 \\
	&=
		x^6 + 6 x^5 y + 15 x^4 y^2 + 20 x^3 y^3 
		+ 15 x^2 y^4 + 6 x y^5 + y^6 \\
\end{align*}$$

### Expansion of $(3x + y^2)^4$
- $a$ is equivalent to $3x$
- $b$ is equivalent to $y^2$
- $n$ is equivlanet to $4$
Thus,

$$\begin{align*}
	(3x+y^2)^4
	&=
		\sum_{k=0}^4 \binom{4}{k} (3x)^{4-k}(y^2)^k \\
	&=
		\frac{4!}{4!0!} (3x)^4 (y^2)^0
		+
		\frac{4!}{3!1!} (3x)^3 (y^2)^1
		+
		\frac{4!}{2!2!} (3x)^2 (y^2)^2
		\\&+
		\frac{4!}{1!3!} (3x)^1 (y^2)^3
		+
		\frac{4!}{0!4!} (3x)^0 (y^2)^4 \\
	&=
		(3x)^4
		+
		4 (3x)^3 (y^2)
		+
		6 (3x)^2 (y^2)^2
		\\&+
		4 (3x) (y^2)^3
		+
		(y^2)^4 \\
	&=
		81x^4 + 108 x^3 y^2 + 54 x^2 y^4 + 12 x y^6 + y^8 \\
\end{align*}$$

## Question 2 [10 marks]

The row of Pascal's triangle containing the binomial coefficients $\binom{11}{k}, 0 \leq k \leq 11$, is:
$$1\;\;11\;\;55\;\;165\;\;330\;\;462\;\;462\;\;330\;\;165\;\;55\;\;11\;\;1$$

Use **Pascal’s identity** to produce the row immediately following this row in Pascal’s triangle. This identity must be explicitly used in your solution.

Pascal's identity: $\binom{n}{k}=\binom{n-1}{k-1}+\binom{n-1}{k}$

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 3 [20 marks]

a) What is the probability that Matilda, John, and Rose win the first, second, third prizes, respectively, in a drawing if 25 people enter a contest and no one can win more than one prize?  
b) What is the probability that Matilda, John, and Rose win the first, second, third prizes, respectively, in a drawing if 25 people enter a contest and winning more than one prize is allowed?   
c) What is the probability that a positive integer not exceeding 100 selected at random is divisible by 3? 

Remember to show all steps. Each question is worth **[6, 7, 7 marks]**.

**Felix Fong, Soutrik Guhathakurta, Arian Ahmadinejad**

*a)*
There is 1 way for Matilda, John, and Rose to win the first, second, and third prize winners. There is a total of $25 P 3$ ways to choose the winners. Thus, the probability of Matilda, John, and Rose winning the first, second, and third prize is $\frac{1}{25P3} = \frac{1}{13800}$.

*b)*
Matilda has a $\frac{1}{25}$ chance to win the first prize. John  has a $\frac{1}{25}$ chance to win second prize. Rose has a $\frac{1}{25}$ chance to win the third prize. Since all events are independent of each other, there is a $\frac{1}{25} \cdot\frac{1}{25} \cdot\frac{1}{25} = \frac{1}{15625}$ probability that Matilda, John, and Rose obtain the first, second, and third prizes respectively.

*c)*
There are 33 positive integers less than 100 that are divisible by 3, so there is a $\frac{33}{100}$ probability that the selected positive integer is divisble by 3.

## Question 4 [6 marks]

What is the probability of these events when we randomly
select a permutation of {1, 2, 3}?  
a) 2 precedes 3.    
b) 3 precedes 1 and 3 precedes 2.  
c) 3 precedes 1 or 1 precedes 3.  

Each is worth **[2 marks]**.

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 5 [12 marks]

What is the probability of these events when we randomly select a permutation of the 26 lowercase letters of the English alphabet? Each is worth **[4 marks]**.

a) $a$ and $z$ are not next to each other in the permutation.  
b) $a$ and $z$ are separated by at least 23 letters in the permutation.  
c) $z$ precedes both $a$ or $b$ in the permutation.

**Felix Fong**

*a)*
Let $E$ be the event that $a$ and $z$ are not next to each other in the permutation. Then $\overline E$ is the event that $a$ and $z$ are next to each other.  The size of the sample space is $26!$, there are $2!$ ways to arrange the letters next to each other, and there are $25$ ways to arrange the remaining letters along with the $az$ pair, hence

$$\begin{align*}
	p(E) &= 1 - p(\overline E) \\
	&=
		1 - \frac{2! 25!}{26!}
	\\&=
		1 - \frac{2!}{26}
	\\&=
		1 - \frac{1}{13}
	\\&=
		\frac{12}{13}
\end{align*}$$

$\therefore$ the probability that $a$ and $z$ are not next to each other in the permutation is $\frac{12}{13}$.

*b)*
Let $E$ be the event that $a$ and $z$ are separated by $23$ letters, and $\delta, \beta$ be arbitrary letters not equal to $a$ and $z$. Then, the possible positions of $a$ and $z$ for a separation of at least $23$ letters are the following:

$$\begin{matrix}
	a \delta \dots \beta z, & z \delta \dots \beta a \\
	a \delta \dots z \beta, & z \delta \dots a \beta \\
	\delta a \dots \beta z, & \delta z \dots \beta a \\
\end{matrix}$$

So there are $6$ ways to position $a$ and $z$, and $24!$ ways to arrange the remaining letters, hence

$$\begin{align*}
	p(E) = \frac{6 \cdot 24!}{26!} = \frac{3}{325}
\end{align*}$$

$\therefore$ the probability that $a$ and $z$ are separated by at least $23$ letters is $\frac{3}{325}$.

*c)*
Let $E_1$ be the event that $z$ precedes $a$ and $E_2$ be the event that $z$ precedes $b$. Then %%the event that $z$ precedes $a$ or $b$ is $E_1 \cup E_2$ and%% $E_1 \cap E_2$ is the event that it precedes $a$ and $b$.

%%For the probability for $z$ to precede any specific letter $\delta$, there are $\binom{26}{2}$ ways to choose the location of letters $z, \delta$, and $1!$ ways to arrange the letters such that $z$ is first. There are also $24!$ ways to arrange the remaining letters, thus

$$\begin{align*}
	\frac{\binom{26}{2} \cdot 1! \cdot 24!}{26!}
	&=
		\frac 1 2
\end{align*}$$%%

Find $p(E_1 \cap E_2)$. There are $\binom{26}{3}$ ways to choose the location of letters $z, a, b$, and $2!$ ways to arrange them such that $z$ is first. There are also $23!$ ways to arrange the remaining letters, thus

$$\begin{align*}
	p(E_1 \cap E_2) &= \frac{\binom{26}{3} \cdot 2! \cdot 23!}{26!} \\
	&= \frac{1}{3}
\end{align*}$$

%%It follows that 

$$\begin{align*}
	p(E_1 \cup E_2)
	&=
		p(E_1) + p(E_2) - p(E_1 \cap E_2)
	\\&=
		\frac 1 2 + \frac 1 2 - \frac 1 3
	\\&= \frac 2 3
\end{align*}$$

$\therefore$ the probability that $z$ precedes both $a$ or $b$ is $\frac 2 3$.%%

$\therefore$ the probability that $z$ precedes both $a$ and $b$ is $\frac 1 3$.

## Question 6 [12 marks]

Assuming all birthdays are equally likely,

a) What is the probability that 3 people chosen at random were born on the same day of the week?  
b) What is the probability that in a group of $n$ people chosen at random, there are at least two born on the same week?  
c) How many people chosen at random are needed to make the probability greater than $\frac{2}{3}$ that there are at least two born on the same day of the week?

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 7 [10 marks]

Show that if $\overline{E}$ and $F$ are independent events, then $E$
and $\overline{F}$ are also independent events using probability laws and transformations. Must show all steps and properties used.

**Felix Fong**

### Theorems
Let $E_1$ and $E_2$ be events in a sample space $S$. Then,
$$\begin{align*}
	p(\overline E_1) &= 1 - p(E_1) \tag{Theorem 1} \\
	p(E_1 \cup E_2) &= p(E_1) + p(E_2) - p(E_1 \cap E_2) \tag{Theorem 2}
\end{align*}$$

### Prove $\overline E$ and $F$ are independent $\implies$ $E$ and $\overline F$ are independent
Let $E$ and $F$ be events in a sample space $S$ and assume that $\overline E$ and $F$ are independent events. Then by the definition of independence,
$$\begin{align*}
	p(\overline E \cap F) &= p(\overline E)p(F) \\
	\tag{By Theorem 2}
	p(\overline E) + p(F) - p(\overline E \cup F) &= p(\overline E) p(F) \\
	1 - p(\overline E \cup F)
	&=
		p(\overline E) p(F) - p(\overline E) - p(F) + 1 \\
	1 - p(\overline E \cup F)
	&=
		-p(\overline E)(1 - p(F)) + (1 - p(F)) \\
	\tag{By Theorem 1}
	p(\overline{\overline E \cup F})
	&=
		(1 - p(\overline E))(1 - p(F)) \\
	\tag{By Theorem 1}
	p(E \cap \overline F)
	&=
		p(E) p(\overline F)
\end{align*}$$

## Question 8 [6 marks]

Suppose that Annie selects a ball by first picking one of two boxes at random and then selecting a ball from this box. The first box contains four orange balls and three black balls, and the second box contains six orange balls and
seven black balls. What is the probability that Ann picked a ball from the second box if she has selected an orange ball?

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 9 [12 marks]

Suppose that $12\%$ of the patients tested in a clinic are infected with avian influenza. Furthermore, suppose that when a blood test for avian influenza is given, $94\%$ of the patients infected with avian influenza test positive and that $2\%$ of the patients not infected with avian influenza test positive. What is the probability that:

a) a patient testing negative for avian influenza with this test is infected with it?  
b) a patient testing negative for avian influenza with this test is not infected with it?  

Each question is worth **[6 marks]**.

Let $A$ = has avian influenza, $P$ = test positive for influenza.
$$\begin{align*}
	p(A) &= 0.12 \\
	p(P \mid A) &= 0.94 \\
	p(P \mid \overline A) &= 0.02
\end{align*}$$

*a)*
$$\begin{align*}
	p(A \mid \overline P)
	&=
		\frac{
			p(\overline P \mid A) p(A)
		} {
			p(\overline P \mid A) p(A)
			+
			p(\overline P \mid \overline A) p(\overline A)
		}
	\\&=
		\frac{
			(1 - p(P \mid A)) p(A)
		} {
			(1 - p(P \mid A)) p(A)
			+
			(1 - p(P \mid \overline A)) p(\overline A)
		}
	\\&=
		\frac{
			0.06(0.12)
		}{
			0.06(0.12) + 0.98(0.88)
		}
	\\&=
		0.00827
\end{align*}$$

*b)*
$$\begin{align*}
	p(\overline A \mid \overline P)
	&=
		1 - 0.00827
	= 0.99173
\end{align*}$$

$p(\overline F\mid \overline E) = 1 - p(F \mid \overline E)$
$\overline F \mid \overline E \subseteq \overline E$