# 2022 WINTER 1DM3: Assignment 7
## This assignment cover sections 5.1, 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3. 

* Instructor: Bin Guo
* Marking: Adam Mak, Hamrish Saravanakumar, Simone Ocvirk (maka9, saravah, ocvirks)

* You will be working on this assignment within your assigned group. Ensure that all students work on the assignment questions together. __ONLY ONE STUDENT WILL BE SUBMITTING YOUR ASSIGNMENT ON BEHALF OF THE GROUP__. All students will recieve the same mark on the group, unless you feel as though a student/students have not contributed to the assignment. If this is the case please reach out to one of the marking TAs so we can work out a solution. __You must write the names of which students contributed to each question at the top of each answer cell__.

* The assignment is __due on Sunday March 13th at 11:59pm__. 

* __Your answer should give full detailed explainations__.

* The practice questions are explained in tutorials and not counted as marks. The full marks is __100__. Question 11 is a __bonus__ question which has __15__ marks as bonus. 

* The total marks up to the maximum 100 marks.

* NOTE: Many of these questions deal with proofs. You will __NOT__ achieve full marks on a question if you simply provide an example.

## IMPORTANT REMINDERS!


- __ONLY THE GROUP LEADER WILL BE SUBMIT ON BEHALF OF THE GROUP__


- __YOU MUST WRITE THE NAMES OF WHICH STUDENTS CONTRIBUTED TO EACH QUESTION, THIS IS NOT OPTIONAL__


- __ALL ANSWERS MUST GIVE DETAILED EXPLANATIONS, IN THIS ASSIGNMENT MORE THAN 50% OF EACH QUESTION'S MARKS ARE ALLOCATED TO THE EXPLANATIONS, SO JUST GIVING THE ANSWERS WILL NOT LET YOU ACHIEVE 50%__

$p \rightarrow q, p \leftrightarrow q, \neg q, p \land q, p \lor q, p\oplus q$, $\bar{B}$, $\{\emptyset\} \in A$, $B \notin A$, $A \subseteq B$, $A \subset B$, $A \cup B$, $A \cap B$, $\bigcap\limits_{i=1}^{n} A_i$, $\bigcup\limits_{i=1}^{n} A_i$, $\exists x \forall y (x = y)$, $\epsilon$,
$\mathbb{Z}$

## Practice Question 1 (Section 5.1, Exercise 41), not marked
Prove that if $A_1,A_2, …,A_n$ and $B$ are sets, then

$(A_1 \cup A_2 \cup ... \cup A_n) \cap B = (A_1 \cap B) \cup (A_2 \cap B) \cup ... \cup (A_n \cap B).$



YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 2 (Section 5.1, Exercise 43), not marked

Prove that if $A_1,A_2, … ,A_n$ are subsets of a universal set $U$, then

$\overline{\cup_{k=1}^nA_k }= \cap_{k=1}^n \overline{A_k}.$



YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 3 (Section 6.1, Exercise 3), Not marked


A multiple-choice test contains 10 questions. There are four possible answers for each question.

1. In how many ways can a student answer the questions on the test if the student answers every question?


2. In how many ways can a student answer the questions on the test if the student can leave answers blank?


YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 4 (Section 6.1, Exercise 17), Not marked


How many strings of five ASCII characters contain the character @ (“at” sign) at least once? [Note: There are 128 different ASCII characters.]



YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Practice Question 5 (Section 6.1, Exercise 63), Not marked

A wired equivalent privacy (WEP) key for a wireless fidelity (WiFi) network is a string of either 10, 26, or 58 hexadecimal digits. How many different WEP keys are there?


YOUR ANSWER HERE

-----------------------

## Question 1 [16 marks]

Prove that if $A_1, A_2, ..., A_n$ and $B$ are sets, then

$(A_1 \cup B) \cap (A_2 \cup B) \cap ··· \cap (A_n \cup B)$\
$= (A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ··· \cap A_n) \cup B$.

**Felix Fong**

Assume $n \in \mathbb Z^+$. Then let $P(n)$ denote the statement 
$$(A_1 \cup B) \cap (A_2 \cup B) \cap ··· \cap (A_n \cup B) = (A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ··· \cap A_n) \cup B$$

Prove by mathematical induction.

#### Base case: $n=1$
$$(A_1 \cup B) = (A_1) \cup B$$
$\therefore$ the base case holds true.

#### Induction Step:
*Inductive Hypothesis*: Assume that $P(n)$ is true, i.e. that 
$$(A_1 \cup B) \cap (A_2 \cup B) \cap ··· \cap (A_n \cup B) = (A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ··· \cap A_n) \cup B$$
is true.
*Want to show*: Prove that $P(n+1)$ is true.

Suppose we have the following sequence:
$$\begin{align*}
	(A_1 \cup B) \cap (A_2 \cup B) \cap \cdots \cap (A_n \cup B) \cap (A_{n+1} \cup B)
\end{align*}$$
But then, by the induction hypothesis, 
$$\begin{align*}
	 ((A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ··· \cap A_n) \cup B) \cap (A_{n+1} \cup B)
\end{align*}$$
And thus, by the distributive property,
$$\begin{align*}
	 ((A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ··· \cap A_n) \cap A_{n+1}) \cup B \\
	 (A_1 \cap A_2 \cap ··· \cap A_n \cap A_{n+1}) \cup B \\
\end{align*}$$

Hence $P(n+1)$ is true.

$\therefore P(n)$ is true for all $n$ in the positive integers.

## Question 2 [6 marks]

A particular brand of shirt comes in $12$ colors, the shirt comes in a unisex version and a women's version, and comes in $3$ sizes for each. How many different types of this shirt are made?

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 3 [6 marks]

How many strings are there of $6$ lowercase letters that have the letter $k$ in them?

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 4 [8 marks]

A key in the Vigenère cryptosystem is a string of English letters, where the case of the letters does not matter. How many different keys for this cryptosystem are there with all of $3$, $4$, and $5$ letters allowed?

Felix Fong

#### Case 1: 3 letters
For each 3 letters, there are 26 possible outcomes. Therefore, by the product rule, there are
$$26 \times 26 \times 26 = 26^3$$
possible combinations.

#### Case 2: 4 letters
For each 3 letters, there are 26 possible outcomes. Therefore, by the product rule, there are
$$26 \times 26 \times 26 \times 26 = 26^4$$
possible combinations.

#### Case 3: 5 letters
For each 3 letters, there are 26 possible outcomes. Therefore, by the product rule, there are
$$26 \times 26 \times 26 \times 26 \times 26 = 26^5$$
possible combinations.

Thus, by the sum rule, there are $26^5+26^4+26^3 = 12355928$ possible combinations.

## Question 5 [10 marks]

Let $x$ be a positive integer. Show that among any group of $x + 1$ (not necessarily consecutive) integers there are at least $2$ integers within the group with exactly the same remainder when they are divided by $x$.

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 6 [16 marks]

Suppose that there are $9$ students in a discrete mathematics class at a small college, none of which are male.

a) Show that the class must have at least five female students or at least five nonbinary students.\
b) Show that the class must have at least three female students or at least seven nonbinary students.

Felix Fong

Since there are no male students, the only 2 options are female and non-binary.

*a)*
Suppose that there are 2 boxes, one each for female and non-binary. By the Generalized Pigeonhole Principle, at least one box contains $\lceil \frac 9 2 \rceil = 5$ students. Since this box could either be female or non-binary, there must be at least 5 female students or at least 5 non-binary students.

*b)*
Assume for the sake of contradiction that there are less than 3 female students and less than 7 nonbinary students. Then, there must be at most 2 female students and 6 nonbinary students. But then, the maximum number of students in the class is $2+6=8$ which is impossible since 9 students are in the class. Therefore, there must be at least 3 female students or at least 7 nonbinary students.

## Question 7 [12 marks]

Assuming that no one has more than $100,000$ hairs on the head of any person and that the population of Hamilton is $579,200$, show there has to be at least $5$ people in Hamilton with the same number of hairs on their heads.

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 8 [8 marks]

Show how to get the value for each of these combinatorics.

a) $C(8, 0)$\
b) $C(12, 6)$

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 9 [12 marks]

If a coin is flipped $8$ times where each flip comes up as either heads or tails. How many possible outcomes...

a) ...are there in total?\
b) ...contain at least $3$ heads?\
c) ...contain exactly $3$ heads?\
d) ...contain the same number of heads and tails?

YOUR ANSWER HERE

## Question 10 [12 marks]

How many strings of $8$ lowercase letters from the English alphabet contain the letters $e$ and $d$ in consecutive positions with $e$ preceding $d$, with all the letters being distinct?

Felix Fong

Consider the string "ed" to be treated as 1 letter. Then, the number of combinations would be the number of ways to arrange "ed" in 7 positions multiplied by the number of ways to arrange 6 of the 24 remaining letters. i.e.

$$7 \times 24 P 6 = 678363840$$

## Bonus Question 11 [10 bonus marks]

How many strings of $5$ lowercase letters from the English alphabet contain the letters $r$ and $e$, where $r$ is somewhere to the left of $e$ in the string, with all the letters being distinct?

YOUR ANSWER HERE
